---
title: A primer on hyperscale data centers
url: https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatacenter/tip/A-primer-on-hyperscale-data-centers
source_name: techtarget_network_management
source_type: news_media
published: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 16:15:00 GMT
is_vendor: false
bias_risk: low
direct_citation: false
collect_method: rss+requests_strip
body_extract_method: requests_strip
---

A primer on hyperscale data centers | TechTarget Search Data Center Search the TechTarget Network Login Register Informa TechTarget Explore the Network IT Operations Cloud Computing Storage Enterprise AI Data Center Knowledge An Informa TechTarget Publication Explore our brands Search Data Center Converged Infrastructure Data Center Careers Data Center Facilities Data Center Hardware Monitoring & Management Other Content News Features Tips Webinars Sponsored Sites More Answers Conference Guides Definitions Opinions Podcasts Quizzes Tech Accelerators Tutorials Videos Follow: Home Data center hardware and strategy Getty Images Tip A primer on hyperscale data centers Hyperscale data centers can hold thousands of servers and process much more data than an enterprise facility. However, they can be difficult to build and maintain. Share this item with your network: By Jacob Roundy Published: 05 Jun 2026 A hyperscale data center is a facility that can excessively scale and quickly meet the needs of new, massive growth. These data centers can hold thousands of servers, are built to process more data than enterprise data centers and have a variety of features that make them unique. There are also challenges in designing and maintaining them compared to enterprise or smaller data centers, such as the need for advanced automation and high uptime requirements. What is a hyperscale data center? By their nature, data centers are designed to operate at scale and often house dozens, if not hundreds, of physical servers and virtual machines (VMs). A hyperscale data center is essentially the next level up -- it can support thousands of servers and millions of VMs. The number of hyperscale data centers is rapidly growing. A&nbsp; market research report &nbsp;from Grand View Research projects that the global hyperscale data center market will grow to $52.54 billion by 2030 at a compound annual growth rate of 13.6%. Hyperscale computing &nbsp;takes a stripped-down approach to networking, combining compute, storage and virtualization layers into a single computing environment. The infrastructure networks servers horizontally to maximize the hardware, and a load balancer monitors the amount of data the facility needs to process. Hyperscale data center architecture is designed to be exceptionally lean and agile. This enables the ability to share the processing load across the infrastructure and quickly add or remove servers or other resources as needed to meet capacity demands. Key features of a hyperscale data center The approach to hyperscale architecture may vary from provider to provider, but most hyperscale data centers share a few common features, including the following: Large site locations. &nbsp;Since hyperscale data centers can support thousands of servers, they tend to be much larger than the average data center. To be considered a hyperscale data center, the facility must occupy at least 10,000 square feet, with some of the truly massive facilities reaching hundreds of thousands or even millions of square feet. High-density server racks. &nbsp;More square footage isn't the only way to fit more servers into a hyperscale facility. Most&nbsp; use specialized high-density server racks . These server racks are wider and can accommodate more components, like power suppliers and hard drives, with enough space for engineers to swap them out and customize them as needed. Most hyperscalers have at least 5,000 servers. Strong energy resources. &nbsp;With so much equipment to support, hyperscale facilities need a massive amount of power. Some facilities consume entire gigawatts of power, which is enough to power a small city. Hyperscalers&nbsp; invest in the most advanced power &nbsp;suppliers and HVAC systems for more efficient cooling. Hyperscale data centers are also often built in areas with cheap electricity, away from critical power grids. Advanced heat control . High-density server racks come with their own set of cooling challenges. More servers, more components, and more complex computations to support AI workloads generate a lot of heat, and as such, many hyperscalers are equipped with state-of-the-art heat management systems . These systems often use a combination of air circulation, liquid cooling and thermal optimization to maintain safe operating temperatures for data center equipment. Disaggregation and modularity. &nbsp;The ability to customize and swap out components is key to the flexibility of hyperscale facilities and equipment. This requires a commitment to personalized configuration, which is expensive, but the result is highly improved modularity, making it easier to adjust infrastructure and equipment on short notice. Intelligent automation. &nbsp;Given the sheer scale of these data centers, manual monitoring is not feasible. Many hyperscalers heavily rely on automation tools to allocate assets, optimize workloads, monitor and repair systems, and more. AI workload support . Hyperscalers are uniquely positioned to meet the demand for AI. Modular and prefabricated server builds help hyperscalers handle AI workloads. These builds enable hyperscale facilities to scale up and out based on demand. In addition, more hyperscalers are consolidating AI workloads into data center campuses to more efficiently support the power and cooling needs of high-density server racks. Benefits of a hyperscale data center These features translate to a range of practical benefits compared to traditional data centers: Flexibility and scalability. &nbsp;The biggest advantage of hyperscalers is the ability to scale out both horizontally and vertically. This enables more balanced workloads and better resource provisioning. As demand increases or decreases, it's easy for hyperscale data centers to&nbsp; adjust and match that demand , no matter the scale. Reduced downtime. &nbsp;Since hyperscalers have a strong focus on automation and a large number of resources, downtime is reduced. The environments are so controlled that they can automatically recover from various issues. If there's a sudden spike in demand, the hyperscaler can meet those needs. Many redundancies are also in place to maintain uptime at all costs. Increased efficiency. &nbsp;From operations to cooling, hyperscale data centers are designed to operate at peak efficiency. And&nbsp; thanks to increased automation , they may not require as much staff to manage. Advanced technology. &nbsp;As larger organizations evolve and iterate on hyperscale architecture, the technology and best practices they pioneer will hopefully trickle down to smaller data centers. This will, in turn, empower all data centers to use their physical space more effectively, provision resources more rapidly and reduce their power usage. Complex computational workloads . As AI proliferates, so too does the need for complex computational workloads. To train an AI model , specialized hardware architectures are needed to perform intense mathematical calculations millions of times. AI queries and inference workloads also require specialized network designs to support high interconnectivity and speed at scale. Hyperscale data centers can more easily meet these needs than traditional data centers, which aren't built to operate at that level. Pay-as-you-go pricing. &nbsp;For hyperscale customers, the services can be more flexible. A hyperscale data center can sustain high service levels and scale as demand increases. Challenges of hyperscale data centers Many hyperscaler features also represent the biggest challenges, including space, power usage and advanced technologies. Land and climate restrictions Hyperscale data centers require a lot of land in areas with cheap, reliable electricity. A hyperscale data center should also not be anywhere with severe inclement weather&nbsp; that could bring the whole place down &nbsp;-- not to mention the need for layered security to prevent cyber attacks and breaches that could do the same. Difficulties in configura