---
title: 'RIPE NCC Days Baltics: Insights into Regional Resilience'
url: https://labs.ripe.net/author/kjerstin-burdiek/ripe-ncc-days-baltics-insights-into-regional-resilience/
source_name: ripe_labs
source_type: operator_blog
published: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 13:34:25 +0000
is_vendor: false
bias_risk: low
direct_citation: true
collect_method: rss+requests_strip
body_extract_method: requests_strip
newsletter_used_in: '2026-07-02'
status: newsletter_used
---

RIPE NCC Days Baltics: Insights into Regional Resilience | RIPE Labs Kjerstin Burdiek RIPE NCC Days Baltics: Insights into Regional Resilience Want to contribute? Learn how Kjerstin Burdiek RIPE NCC Days Baltics: Insights into Regional Resilience Kjerstin Burdiek (RIPE NCC staff) Kjerstin Burdiek Kjerstin Burdiek is a Communications Officer at the RIPE NCC. Prior to joining the RIPE NCC in 2021, she contributed to policy research and strategic communications at a think tank. In her educational background, she explored the intersection of linguistics and political science. She currently focuses on communications around Internet … More Contributors: Anastasiya Pak , Romain Bosc , Alex Semenyaka , Emile Aben 14 min read — 30 Jun 2026 ripe rpki ipv6 routing community governance internet infrastructure internet number resources 21 Click to like, and right click to unlike this article. 0 Share Share X/Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Mastodon Vkontacte Telegram Whatsapp Email Copy link More On 3-4 June 2026, we convened in Riga, Latvia for RIPE NCC Days Baltics. 76 participants from nine countries participated in sessions covering important topics in network operations, with a special focus on resilience for a region that has seen repeated network disruptions in recent years. At RIPE NCC Days Baltics, network engineers and other operators from Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and neighbouring countries gathered to discuss the main trends and developments affecting the region’s Internet. Resilience through collaboration and capacity-building A common thread through the meeting was the topic of the need for resilience. The Baltic region has experienced several disruptions to its Internet, both at the infrastructure and the network levels. At the physical layer, the region's connectivity to the wider Internet depends on submarine cables. The outages of several of these cables in the Baltic region during the winter of 2024-2025 brought that topic to the attention of a wider audience. In his presentation about these outages , the RIPE NCC's Emile Aben showed that RIPE Atlas measurements indicate that the Internet routed around this damage. The data indicates that only some of the paths between countries that were measured saw a slight increase in latency, but no increased packet loss was observed. This event highlighted the importance of resilience not only in infrastructure but also in routing, as packets were able to move along alternative routes. This theme was expanded on during a panel session featuring Dmitrijs Nikitins, Chief Technology Officer at Tet, Agnese Zariņa, Director of the Communications Department at the Ministry of Transport of Latvia, Baiba Kaskina, General Manager at CERT.LV, Evijs Taube, Member of the Management Board at LVRTC, and Hisham Ibrahim, Chief Community Officer at the RIPE NCC. From left to right: moderator Romain Bosc, RIPE NCC, and panellists Agnese Zariņa, Dmitrijs Nikitins, Baiba Kaskina, Evijs Taube (holding a piece of a damaged Baltic Sea cable) and Hisham Ibrahim With the significant increase in cyberattacks across the region and the geopolitical landscape becoming more volatile, speakers emphasised that developing cross-border resilience has become a top priority in recent years. The resilience of Ukraine’s communications infrastructure during the ongoing war provides an example several speakers referenced in their comments. They mentioned how their organisations had adapted their systems by studying the efforts of Ukrainian operators. The protection of submarine cables was also discussed, with panellists describing recent improvements in real-time monitoring and emergency repair. For enhancing both security and resilience, they stressed the importance of good practices in the implementation of Internet standards, such as RPKI and ASPA, to prevent BGP prefix hijacks and route leaks and proactively testing equipment and networks in live environments. Diversifying routes and cross-border connections and having disaster recovery sites outside of the country were also noted as important. Speakers pointed to potential pitfalls, such as the persistence of network bottlenecks, poor IT security and critical dependencies making it sometimes difficult to properly manage risks, for example in cases of software outages or failures in the electrical grid. Finally, speakers stressed the need for effective information-sharing frameworks and ensuring visibility into networks to be able to respond quickly to incidents. They also highlighted the importance of fostering regional and international cooperation, supporting a competitive and diverse connectivity environment and recognising the essential roles of public-private collaboration and technical coordination in maintaining collective resilience. Another organisation looking at network resilience and cybersecurity is BEREC, the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications. Zdravko Jukić, Deputy Executive Director at HAKOM, presented some of BEREC’s latest activities , with a focus on recent developments led by the Cybersecurity and Resilience Working Group, where he serves as co-chair. In addition, Zdravko discussed the possible new tasks and evolving role of national regulators in light of the changing regulatory landscape. He mentioned various initiatives, including the recent publication of BEREC’s assessment reports on two major legislative proposals: the revision of the Cybersecurity Act (CSA2) and the Digital Networks Act (DNA). In particular, the DNA proposal introduces the creation of a pan-European preparedness plan to strengthen cyber resilience in which BEREC would play a key role. The Baltic region at a glance Building resilience requires first having insight into networks and their vulnerabilities. According to Alex Semenyaka of the RIPE NCC, some of these vulnerabilities in the region include the low number of cross-border connections , some of which are submarine cables. This factor, combined with the underutilisation of local traffic exchange points, leads to high amounts of tromboning and very abnormal paths going as far away as Venezuela and India, as well as routes going through Russia and the United States. This effect can be seen in the image below showing Estonia-Latvia-Estonia routes. Overall, traffic with neighbouring countries is particularly vulnerable due to reliance on submarine cables. Inside the region, paths from Estonia to Lithuania are complex due to their lack of shared border, though Lithuania has the highest overall diversification of external connections. Local traffic is often handled by global players, which is problematic as these entities are not interested in localisation, only optimising throughput. A solution here could be the development of Latvia as a regional hub by strengthening IXPs (Eric Andrei Băleanu shared Romania’s experience here ) and increasing network monitoring. This last part can be accomplished by making use of the RIPE NCC’s tools like RIS , RIPE Atlas and RIPEstat . Resource holdership Overall, as presented by the RIPE NCC’s Anastasiya Pak, the Baltic region represents a mature and highly connected Internet ecosystem with a substantial number of Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) and continued IPv6 allocation activity. Lithuania stands out in terms of registered allocated resources, particularly IPv4 and IPv6 allocations, which are significantly higher than in the other two countries analysed, Latvia and Estonia. Latvia differs from the other Baltic countries in terms of the number of End Users (176) and sponsored resources (121 IPv4 and 26 IPv6 Assignments). While it has the smallest membership base (63 members) among the three countries, it has a comparatively larger number of End Users. Estonia maintains the largest number of members in the region. The statistics in the image above are all derived from RIPE NCC registration data that uses 2-letter ISO-3166 codes as the unique identifier for countries. As explained in our